Can I add code that is licensed as "Creative Commons Attribution Share
Alike 4.0 International" into my commercial project?

Yes, you can add code that is licensed under the "Creative Commons
Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International" (CC BY-SA 4.0) into your
commercial project, but with some conditions. The CC BY-SA 4.0 license
requires that you provide attribution to the original author(s) of the
code, and that you also license any modifications or additions you
make to the code under the same CC BY-SA 4.0 license. So, if you use
code under this license in your commercial project, your commercial
project must also be released under the same license or a compatible
license.  wol pumba If I just use a single file that contains a single
C++ class, do I also have to release code that uses this class under
CC BY-SA 4.0?

Yes, if you use a single file that is licensed under the CC BY-SA 4.0
license in your commercial project, then any code that incorporates or
uses that file must also be released under the same license or a
compatible license. This means that if you use the C++ class contained
in the file, the code that uses that class must also be licensed under
the CC BY-SA 4.0 license.


https://opensource.stackexchange.com/questions/6016/can-i-sell-charge-a-code-that-link-use-a-library-released-as-attribution-shareal

However, note that if you choose to keep the CC BY-SA license, you do
not need to distribute the source code of your application. Strictly
speaking, in order to comply with the BY-SA terms on the library, you
can choose to distribute only the binaries under CC BY-SA 4.0 and
choose not to distribute the source code. This is exactly one reason
why Creative Commons expressly discourages the use of CC BY-SA (or
virtually any Creative Commons license) on software.